---
title: book review: when
tags: book review
date: 2026-06-12
description: thoughts on When by Daniel Pink
---

Welcome to another book review; this time, I'm thinking about *When* by Daniel Pink. This book explores the science of timing, and is broken into three sections: "The Day" (about daily energy cycles), "Beginnings, Middles, and Endings" (how they affect your trajectory and impact your experiences), and "Synchronizing with Others" (about group timing). Although "The Day" section revealed some interesting observations and advice (particularly in terms of how our internal clocks operate, and what time of day to go see a doctor), I have found that since I finished the book, my thoughts have lingered on the latter two parts.

### Section 2: Beginnings, Middles, and Endings

Pink argues in "Beginnings" that fresh starts via temporal landmarks distance us mentally from past failures, and allow us to have a more positive outlook on adopting new behaviors (or eliminating old ones). Building on this, he discusses in the next chapter how middles are often characterized by a lack of motivation, and how this middle section is often where people fail at their goals.

For example, think about New Year's Resolutions. Millions (billions?) of people around the world create them; how often do you hear the phrase "new year, new me" in December and January? But a year is a long time, and people usually lose motivation to keep up with their goals 3-6 weeks after the new year.[^1]

But middles don't have to be that long; temporal landmarks are whatever we make them. Beginning of a week? A month? A quarter?

I came up with my quarterly review system before reading this book, and was surprised to find that there's actual research that backs up the efficacy of this system. More frequent temporal landmarks eliminate a longer, demotivating middle; and re-affirming commitments to my goals on a more regular basis ensures that, even if I do lose motivation on Thursday, Sunday is right around the corner, and acts as a marker for me to start again.

In "Endings", Pink discusses how we as humans tend to cut out the non-essential, including people:

> "When time is constrained and limited, as it is in act three (later life), we attune to the now. We pursue different goals — emotional satisfaction, an appreciation for life, a sense of meaning. And these updated goals make people 'highly selective in their choice of social partners' and prompt them to 'systemically hone their social networks.' We edit our relationships. We omit needless people. We choose to spend our remaining years with networks that are small, tight, and populated with those who satisfy higher needs."[^2]

I realized reading this that this is how I subconsciously act before I move away from a place. I prioritize time with people I feel particularly close to, to ensure that my remaining time is well spent, and only keep in touch with a handful of people (if that) after I leave. Since coming back to the US from Taiwan, for example, I have only really consistently maintained one friendship (hi 岑). But each time I move, I've felt a sense of guilt for dropping so many relationships in the process. The fact that this is normal behavior is a relief to me, but even knowing it, I don't think that sense of guilt will ever fully fade.

### Section 3: Synchronizing with Others

This section focused primarily on how syncing with others can help group performance. He discusses synchronization on three levels: the boss, the tribe, and the heart. By aligning with the boss, he means focusing the collective mind by aligning the group to a common leader or guiding force (ex. a deadline). His ideas of aligning to the tribe and the heart essentially mean creating a sense of belonging and shared purpose among members of a group.

Given how much I've been thinking about demagoguery lately, that's naturally where my thoughts drifted as I read this.

While Pink was certainly not focused on politics when he wrote this, I wonder: who is The Boss of Congress? Congresspeople are already intended to be the unifying voice of their constituents across states and districts, with the President as the single leader intended to bind the country together across these borders. If not the President, members of Congress elect individuals to act as the leaders of each house.

But something is wrong; Pink notes that the leader should be "above and apart from the group itself"[^3] in order to act as the connecting tissue, but the divisive association of a political party with these roles completely negates their intended natures.

Maybe one of the reasons our political system is so inefficient is because there is no single leader that is deeply respected across both parties. In our duopolistic party system, each party's respect for its counterpart has degraded significantly over time, and this shows in the increasing polarization of Congress.[^4] Citizens and leaders alike have a sense of belonging within their political in-group, but the broader sense of American identity has faded to the background in lieu of political group identity. Without a neutral arbiter to help moderate debate and discussion between the parties, what are we losing?

Consider public transit. The Purple Line in DC, a ~16 mile rail line, has been in production for almost 10 years; it took over 20 before that for it to be approved (first officially proposed as a light rail in 2001, and struggled for decades against local opposition groups).[^5]Meanwhile, China *in that same timeframe* has built over 23,000 miles of high speed rail across the country.[^6]

The democratic process can help create better solutions to society's problems *in theory*, when we are having these discussions in good faith. But the current demagogic nature of our society and lack of unification comes at the cost of progress. China's rail system exemplifies what might be possible if our system was efficient. I'm not arguing for authoritarianism; rather, I'm trying to underline how the lack of a respected, binding arbitrator slows down collective action in ways that are deeply detrimental to societal progress.

When did we begin to allow political tribalism to outweigh our shared American identity? And when does the cost of our resulting political dysfunction outweigh the benefits of the democratic process?

______

[^1]: Based on my own experience; my climbing gym surges with new members in January and then dwindles back to normal levels by mid-February.

[^2]: Daniel Pink, *When: The Scientific Secrets of Perfect Timing* (New York: Riverhead Books, 2018), 159.

[^3]: Pink, *When*, 183.

[^4]: Clio Andris et al., "The Rise of Partisanship and Super-Cooperators in the U.S. House of Representatives," *PLOS ONE* 10, no. 4 (2015): e0123507.

[^5]: "Tracking the Ups and Downs of the Purple Line's Roller Coaster History," Bethesda Magazine, September 16, 2020.

[^6]: "China's High-Speed Rail Lines Top 37,900 km at End of 2020," Xinhua, January 9, 2021.